*24.118:* *Infinite Cardinalities* ![An illustration of the two options
in Newcom's Problem, in a charmingly naïve
style.](c31744bd655b0e125a7e45967145ce6c.png){style="padding-top:60px"
width="50%" align="right"}

-   [Hilbert's Hotel](#section_hilbert)
    -   [The Hotel](#section_hotel)
    -   [A Paradox](#section_paradox)
-   [Cardinality](#section_cardinality)
    -   [Bijections; Injections; Surjections](#section_bis)
    -   [Extending the Notion of Number](#section_extending)
    -   [Some Properties of Bijections](#section_bijections)
    -   [Some Properties of Injections](#section_injections)
    -   [An Example](#section_example)
-   [The Rational Numbers](#section_rational)
-   [The Real Numbers](#section_real)
    -   [Step 1: The Cardinality of the Naturals is Less Than or Equal
        to the Cardinality of \\(\[0,1\]\\)](#section_n01)
    -   [Step 2: The Cardinality of the Naturals is Not Equal to the
        Cardinality of \\(\[0,1\]\\)](#section_n01)
        -   [A Small Complication](#section_complication)
    -   [Step 3: The Cardinality of \\(\[0,1\]\\) Equals the Cardinality
        of the Reals](#section_01r)
        -   [Step 3a: The Cardinality of \\((0,1)\\) Equals the
            Cardinality of the Reals](#section_open01r)
            -   [Step 3a-i: The Cardinality of \\((-\\frac{\\pi}{2},
                \\frac{\\pi}{2})\\) Equals the Cardinality of the
                Reals](#section_tan)
            -   [Step 3a-ii: The Cardinality of \\((0,1)\\) Equals the
                Cardinality of \\((-\\frac{\\pi}{2},
                \\frac{\\pi}{2})\\)](#section_linear)
        -   [Step 3b: The Cardinality of \\((0,1)\\) Equals the
            Cardinality of \\(\[0,1\]\\)](#section_openclose)
-   [A Helpful Result](#section_helpful)
-   [\\(\\mathbb{R}\\), \\(\\mathbb{R}\^2\\),...](#section_vector)
    -   [Step 1: \\(\|\[0,1\]\^d\|=\|\[0,1\]\^d\\times
        \[0,1\]\^d\|\\)](#section_01dto01d2)
    -   [Step 2: \\(\|\[0,1\]\| = \|\[0,1\]\^d\|\\)](#section_01to01d)
-   [Cantor's Theorem](#section_cantor)
    -   [The Proof](#section_proof)

# Hilbert's Hotel {#section_hilbert}

-   1.  \\(G\^+\\) has everything \\(G\\) has in it, plus one more
        thing.
    2.  Conclusion: \\(G\^+\\) has more things in it than \\(G\\).

-   1.  There are as many guests in \\(G\\) as hotel rooms in Hilbert's
        Hotel.
    2.  There are as many guests in \\(G\^+\\) as hotel rooms in
        Hilbert's Hotel.
    3.  \\(G\^+\\) has the same number of things in it as \\(G\\).

# Cardinality {#section_cardinality}

For a long time, people thought that paradoxes like the one above showed
that there was something wrong with trying to use notions like "same
number as" or "more than" when we're talking about infinite sets. But
then came [Georg Cantor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georg_Cantor),
19th Century German mathematician, who had the essential insight, when
it comes to infinity. He saw that there was a way of making precise
notions like "more than", "less than" and "same number as"; that, if you
made these notions precise in this way, then paradoxes like the one
above were resolved; and that these new, precise notions were extremely
fruitful, mathematically.

Let me explain.

-   -   There is an **injection** from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\) iff you can
        pair every apple with a distinct banana (and possibly have some
        bananas left over).

-   -   There is a **surjection** from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\) iff you can
        pair every apple with a banana, and not have any bananas left
        over (though maybe different apples get paired with the same
        banana).

-   -   There is a **bijection** from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\) iff you can
        pair every apple with a distinct banana, and not have any
        bananas left over --- i.e., there is an injection from \\(A\\)
        to \\(B\\) that is also a surjection.

-   1.  \\(G\^+\\) has everything \\(G\\) has in it, plus one more
        thing.
    2.  \\(G\^+\\) has more things in it than \\(G\\).

-   1.  There are as many guests in \\(G\\) as hotel rooms in Hilbert's
        Hotel.
    2.  There are as many guests in \\(G\^+\\) as hotel rooms in
        Hilbert's Hotel.
    3.  \\(G\^+\\) has the same number of things in it as \\(G\\).

-   1.  Bijections are **reflexive**. That is: there is a bijection from
        every set \\(A\\) to itself. For example, the identity function
        \\(f(a)=a\\), for all \\(a\\in A\\).

    2.  Bijections are **symmetric**. That is: if there is a bijection
        from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\), there is a bijection from \\(B\\) to
        \\(A\\). (In particular, if \\(f\\) is a bijection from \\(A\\)
        to \\(B\\), \\(f\^{-1}\\) is a bijection from \\(B\\) to
        \\(A\\). Convince yourself!)

-   3.  Bijections are **transitive**. That is: if there is a bijection
        from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\), and a bijection from \\(B\\) to
        \\(C\\), there is a bijection from \\(A\\) to \\(C\\). (In
        particular, if \\(f\\) is a bijection from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\),
        and \\(g\\) is a bijection from \\(B\\) to \\(C\\), then
        \\(g\\circ f\\) is a bijection from \\(A\\) to \\(C\\). Convince
        yourself!)

-   1.  Injections are **reflexive** (just like bijections, above).
    2.  Injections are **transitive** (just like bijections, above).

-   3.  Injections are **anti-symmetric**. That is: if there is an
        injection from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\), and an injection from \\(B\\)
        to \\(A\\), then there is a bijection from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\).

-   4.  Injections are **total**. That is: for all sets \\(A\\) and
        \\(B\\), either there is an injection from \\(A\\) to \\(B\\) or
        there is an injection from \\(B\\) to \\(A\\).

-   -   if \\(n\\) is an even natural number, \\(f(n)=\\frac{n}{2}\\),
        and
    -   if \\(n\\) is an odd natural number, \\(f(n)=-\\frac{n+1}{2}\\)

# The Rational Numbers {#section_rational}

A rational number is a number equal to \\(\\frac{a}{b}\\), where \\(a\\)
is an integer, and \\(b\\) is an integer distinct from zero. (For
instance, \\(\\frac{17}{3}\\) is a rational number, and so is
\\(4=\\frac{4}{1}\\).)

Here is a surprising fact: the cardinality of the set of rational
numbers \\(\\mathbb{Q}\\) is the *same* as the cardinality of the set of
natural numbers.

The easiest way to see this is by building a matrix, such as the
following:

![A grid. The top row reads \'0/1, 0/2, 0/3,...\' The second row reads
\'1/1, 1/2, 1/3,...\'. And so
on.](http://web.mit.edu/arayo/www/Paradox/rationals-unmarked.gif){type="saveimage"
target="[object Object]" height="400" width="400"}

Every (non-negative) rational number appears on some cell of our matrix.
So we can show that there is a bijection between the natural numbers and
the (non-negative) rational numbers by assigning a different natural
number to each cell.

There are many different ways of doing this. One is to follow the route
below:

![The same grid as above, with a path drawn over it. The path starts at
the top left square of the grid, with the \'0/1\'. It then goes down to
the second row, first colum, with the \'1/1\'. It then goes diagonally
up to the \'0/2\'. Then across to the \'0/3\'. Then diagonally down,
through \'1/2\' to \'2/1\'. Then it goes down to \'3/1\', then
diagonally up through \'2/2\', 1/3\' to \'0/4\'. And so on, zigzagging
through every square of the
grid.](http://web.mit.edu/arayo/www/Paradox/diagonal.gif){type="saveimage"
target="[object Object]" height="400" width="400"}

As you advance through the red path, you assign natural numbers to
(non-negative) rational numbers: \\\[0 \\rightarrow \\frac{0}{1}\\\]
\\\[1 \\rightarrow \\frac{1}{1}\\\] \\\[2 \\rightarrow \\frac{0}{2}\\\]
\\\[3 \\rightarrow \\frac{0}{3}\\\] \\\[4 \\rightarrow \\frac{1}{2}\\\]
\\\[\\vdots\\\]

Actually, a slight adjustment is needed to correct for the fact that
rational numbers appear on the matrix multiple times under different
names (\\(0\\), for example, appears as "\\(\\frac{0}{1}\\)",
"\\(frac{0}{2}", "\\frac{0}{3}", etc.). We can address the issue by
following the same route, but skipping any cells with rational numbers
that have already been counted. So the assignment we get is actually the
following: \\\[0 \\rightarrow \\frac{0}{1} = 0\\\] \\\[1 \\rightarrow
\\frac{1}{1} = 1\\\] \\\[2 \\rightarrow \\frac{1}{2}\\\] \\\[3
\\rightarrow \\frac{2}{1} = 2\\\] \\\[4 \\rightarrow \\frac{3}{1} =
3\\\] \\\[\\vdots\\\]

This assignment immediately yields a bijection \\(f\\) from the natural
numbers to the (non-negative) rational numbers: \\\[f(0) = 0\\\]
\\\[f(1) = 1\\\] \\\[f(2) =1/2\\\] \\\[f(3) = 2\\\] \\\[f(4) = 3\\\]
\\\[\\vdots\\\]

This construction gives you a bijection from the naturals to the
non-negative rationals. Exercise: show that there is a bijection from
the naturals to the rationals (i.e., the set of both negative and
non-negative rationals).

\

# The Real Numbers {#section_real}

Lots of infinite sets have the same cardinality as the natural numbers.
Do all infinite sets have the same cardinality as the natural numbers?
No! The first result to this effect was proved by Cantor, and it is the
result that started the whole field of study of trans-finite
cardinalities (as they are called).

The result is that the cardinality of the real numbers is larger than
the cardinality of the natural numbers.

Let's prove it!

-   -   The first member of our list is \\(f(0)\\), which will be some
        particular real number ; say, \\(0.a_1a_2a_3\\ldots\\) (where
        \\(a_1\\), \\(a_2\\), \\(a_3\\),... are digits between "0" and
        "9").
    -   The second member of our list is \\(f(1)\\), which is again some
        particular real number; say, \\(0.b_1b_2b_3\\ldots\\) (where
        \\(b_1\\), \\(b_2\\), \\(b_3\\),... are digits between "0" and
        "9").
    -   The third member of our list is \\(f(2)\\), which is again some
        particular real number; say, \\(0.c_1c_2c_3\\ldots\\) (where
        \\(c_1\\), \\(c_2\\), \\(c_3\\),... are digits between "0" and
        "9").
    -   And so forth.

-   

From step 1 and step 2, we can conclude that the cardinality of the
naturals is less than the cardinality of \[0,1\]. Amazing!

-   -   

Putting *that* together with step 2, we get:
\\(\|\\mathbb{N}\|\\le\|\\mathbb{R}\|\\). Double success!

Putting *that* together with step 1, we get
\\(\|\\mathbb{N}\|\<\|\\mathbb{R}\|\\). Hooray!

\

# A Helpful Result {#section_helpful}

The technique we used in the last part of Step 3, above, can be
generalised to a useful result.

A set \\(C\\) is **countable** iff \\(\|C\|\\le \|\\mathbb{N}\|\\). Here
is the result.

> If \\(\|A\|\\ge\|\\mathbb{N}\|\\), then, for any countable \\(C\\),
> \\(\|A\\cup C\|=\|A\|\\).

Here is the proof:

Take a subset of \\(A\\) with the cardinality of
\\(\\mathbb{N}\\).^[1](#fn:1 "see footnote"){#fnref:1 .footnote}^ Call
that subset "\\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\)", and call its elements "\\(a_0, a_1,
a_2,\\ldots\\)". First we show that

> Lemma: \\(\|A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\| = \|A\^\\mathbb{N}\|\\) (and,
> hence, equals \\(\|\\mathbb{N}\|\\)).

How's that? Take all elements of \\(C\\) that aren't also in
\\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\) --- call the set of them "\\(C\^-\\)". At most,
\\(\|C\^-\|=\|\\mathbb{N}\|\\). Suppose it does. Call the elements of
\\(C\^-\\) "\\(c_0, c_1, c_2,\\ldots\\)"

Let \\(f\\) be the function that maps \\(a_0, a_1, a_2,\\ldots \\in
A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\\) to \\(a_0, a_2, a_4,\\ldots\\in
A\^\\mathbb{N}\\), and maps \\(c_0, c_1, c_2,\\ldots\\in
A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\\) to \\(a_1, a_3, a_5,\\ldots\\in
A\^\\mathbb{N}\\).

\\(f\\) is a bijection from \\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\\) to
\\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\). (Convince yourself that this is so!)

If \\(\|C\|\<\|\\mathbb{N}\\), then it is even easier to show that there
is a bijection from \\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\\) to \\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\).
I leave this as a fun diversion for the reader.

Now, here's a bijection from \\(A\\cup C\\) to \\(A\\). Map everything
in \\(A\\cup C\\) to itself except for the members of
\\(A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\\). Map those elements to \\(A\\mathbb{N}\\),
via \\(f\\).

And so: \\(\|A\^\\mathbb{N}\\cup C\|=\|A\|\\)

\

# R, R^2^, ... {#section_vector}

So the cardinality of the reals is greater than the cardinality of the
naturals. And you can see, from the proof, that any interval of real
numbers has the same cardinality as the set of all the reals, and hence
a greater cardinality than the naturals. Crazy!

What about \\(\\mathbb{R\^{2}}\\) --- that is, the set of all ordered
pairs of real numbers? That too has the cardinality of the real numbers!
Here is a proof.

Putting steps 1 and 2 together, we get \\\[\|\[0,1\]\|=\|\[0,1\]\\times
\[0,1\]\\\]

We already know that \\(\|\\mathbb{R}\|=\|\[0,1\]\|\\), and, hence, that
\\(\|\[0,1\]\\times \[0,1\]\| = \|\\mathbb{R}\\times \\mathbb{R}\|\\).
So, from above, we get \\\[\|\\mathbb{R}\|=\|\\mathbb{R}\^2\|\\\]

We can go further. A similar construction to the one above shows that
\\(\|\[0,1\]\| = \|\[0,1\]\\times \[0,1\] \\times \[0,1\]\|\\), and
another shows that \\(\|\[0,1\]\| = \|\[0,1\]\\times \[0,1\] \\times
\[0,1\]\|\\times \[0,1\]\\), and so on, and, hence that, for all
\\(n\\in\\mathbb{N}\\), \\\[\|\\mathbb{R}\|=\|\\mathbb{R}\^n\|\\\]

And, in fact, \\\[\|\\mathbb{R}\|=\|\\mathbb{R}\^\\mathbb{N}\|\\\]
(though you can't prove it using the method above).

Whoa!

\

# Cantor's Theorem {#section_cantor}

So now we have two infinite cardinalities: the cardinality of the
natural numbers, and the cardinality of the real numbers. And we've seen
that it is not easy to find a set any bigger than the reals. Is that it?
Have we got as big as it gets?

No. We haven't. And Cantor showed that we can *never* get as big as it
gets. For every set, there is a bigger set. There are infinite number of
infinite cardinalities!

The result I will now prove is called **Cantor's Theorem**. It says, to
put it roughly, that

> A set always has more subsets than it has members.

To put it more formally: a **power set** \\(\\mathcal{P}(A)\\) is the
set of all subsets of \\(A\\).^[2](#fn:2 "see footnote"){#fnref:2
.footnote}^ Cantor theorem states that
\\\[\|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\>\|A\|\\\]

## The Proof {#section_proof}

We have to prove that

1.  \\(\|A\| \\leq \|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\), and
2.  \\(\|A\| \\neq \|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\)

The first of these is relatively easy to prove, since the function
\\(f(x) = \\{x\\}\\) is an injection from \\(A\\) to
\\(\\mathcal{P}(A)\\). So what we really need to prove is the second
statement: \\(\|A\| \\neq \|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\).

Our proof will proceed by *reductio ad absurdum*. So we will assume the
negation of \\(\|A\| \\neq \|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\): \\\[\|A\| =
\|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\\] and use this assumption to prove a
contradiction.

In order for our assumption to be true, there must be a bijection
\\(f\\) from \\(A\\) to \\(\\mathcal{P}(A) \\).

Notice that, for each \\(a\\) in \\(A\\), we can ask the following
question:

\\\[a \\in f(a)\\text{?}\\\]

(If, for example, \\(f\\) maps \\(a\\) to \\(\\{\\}\\), then not-(\\(a
\\in f(a)\\)). If, on the other hand, \\(f\\) maps \\(a\\) to
\\(\\{a\\}\\), then \\(a \\in f(a)\\).)

With this in mind, let us define \\(D\\) to be the subset of \\(A\\)
such that

> for any \\(x\\), \\(x \\in D\\) if and only if not-(\\(x \\in f(x)\\))

We now note the following two things:

1.  \\(D\\) is a subset of \\(A\\), and therefore \\(D \\in
    \\mathcal{P}(A)\\).
2.  \\(f\\), being a bijection, is a surjection from \\(A\\) to
    \\(\\mathcal{P}(A)\\).

From these two things together it follows that there must be some \\(d
\\in A\\) such that \\(f(d) = D\\).

Question: \\(d \\in D\\)?

By the definition of \\(D\\), \\(d \\in D\\) if and only if not-(\\(d
\\in f(d)\\)).

Since \\(f(d) = D\\), this can be restated as follows:

> \\(d \\in D\\) if and only if not-(\\(d \\in D\\)).

But that is impossible! It says that something is the case if and only
if it is not the case.

We have arrived at our contradiction. So our assumption must be false.
In other words: it cannot be the case that \\(\|A\| =
\|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\).

So we have shown that \\(\|A\| \< \|\\mathcal{P}(A)\|\\). We have shown
that, regardless of how many things there are in \\(A\\), there must be
more in \\(\\mathcal{P}(A)). Amazing!

::: footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  ::: {#fn:1}
    We know there must be such a subset, as (\|S\|\>\|\\mathbb{N}\|), so
    there is an injection from (\\mathbb{N}) to (\|S\|); we can just let
    the countable subset be the range of this injection. In general, for
    similar reasons, whenever (\|A\|\\le\|B\|), there is a subset of
    \\(A\\) with the cardinality of \\(B\\).
    [ ↩](#fnref:1 "return to article"){.reversefootnote}
    :::

2.  ::: {#fn:2}
    For example: if \\(A\\) is the set \\(\\{0,1,2\\}\\), then
    \\(\\mathcal{P}(A)\\) is \\(\\{\\{\\}, \\{0\\}, \\{1\\}, \\{2\\},
    \\{0,1\\}, \\{0,2\\}, \\{1,2\\}, \\{0,1,2\\}\\}\\)
    [ ↩](#fnref:2 "return to article"){.reversefootnote}
    :::
:::
